docs/03_schema.md, before:

# Schema Specification

This document defines the JSON contracts returned by `atomc` and the
HTTP server. It is the canonical reference for agent integrations.

## Versioning
- Every JSON response includes `schema_version`.
- Initial value: `v1`.
- Clients must ignore unknown fields for forward compatibility.

## Common Response Fields
All responses include `schema_version`. `request_id` and `warnings` may
be present when available.

```json
{
  "schema_version": "v1",
  "request_id": "req_123",
  "warnings": []
}
```

Fields:
- `schema_version` (string, required)
- `request_id` (string, optional): trace id for logs.
- `warnings` (array, optional): non-fatal issues.

### Warning Object
```json
{
  "code": "scope_missing",
  "message": "Commit scope omitted for a global change",
  "details": {
    "commit_id": "commit-2"
  }
}
```

Fields:
- `code` (string, required)
- `message` (string, required)
- `details` (object, optional)

## Request ID
- CLI: generated per command invocation for JSON output.
- Server: generated per HTTP request; if `X-Request-Id` is provided,
  it is echoed back in responses.
- Format: opaque string; UUID or ULID recommended. A `req_` prefix is
  allowed but not required.

## Input Metadata
Plan/apply responses may include an `input` object describing how the
plan diff was derived.

Fields:
- `source` (string, required): `repo` or `diff`.
- `diff_mode` (string, optional): `worktree`, `staged`, or `all`.
- `include_untracked` (bool, optional): only for repo-derived diffs.
- `diff_hash` (string, optional): SHA-256 of the diff text formatted as
  `sha256:<hex>`.

## Commit Plan Response
Returned by `atomc plan` and `/v1/commit-plan`.

```json
{
  "schema_version": "v1",
  "request_id": "req_123",
  "input": {
    "source": "repo",
    "diff_mode": "all",
    "include_untracked": true,
    "diff_hash": "sha256:..."
  },
  "plan": [
    {
      "id": "commit-1",
      "type": "feat",
      "scope": "auth",
      "summary": "add token refresh handler",
      "body": [
        "Add refresh flow in auth service",
        "Wire refresh to login middleware"
      ],
      "files": ["src/auth.rs", "src/middleware.rs"],
      "hunks": []
    }
  ],
  "warnings": []
}
```

### Commit Unit
Fields:
- `id` (string, required): unique within the plan.
- `type` (string, required): conventional commit type.
- `scope` (string or null, required): kebab-case (lowercase letters, digits,
  hyphens only) or null for global.
- `summary` (string, required): 50-72 chars, imperative.
- `body` (array of strings, required): 1-3 bullet lines.
- `files` (array of strings, required): repo-relative paths.
- `hunks` (array, required): must be empty in MVP.

### Commit Types
Allowed values for `type`:
`feat`, `fix`, `refactor`, `style`, `docs`, `test`, `chore`, `build`,
`perf`, `ci`.

### Hunk Target (optional)
Hunks allow more precise staging. In MVP this may be empty.

```json
{
  "file": "src/auth.rs",
  "header": "@@ -10,6 +10,12 @@",
  "id": "hunk-1"
}
```

Fields:
- `file` (string, required): repo-relative path.
- `header` (string, required): git hunk header line.
- `id` (string, optional): stable identifier for the hunk.

## Commit Apply Response
Returned by `atomc apply` and `/v1/commit-apply`.

```json
{
  "schema_version": "v1",
  "request_id": "req_456",
  "input": {
    "source": "repo",
    "diff_mode": "all",
    "include_untracked": true,
    "diff_hash": "sha256:..."
  },
  "plan": [ /* same as Commit Plan */ ],
  "results": [
    {
      "id": "commit-1",
      "status": "applied",
      "commit_hash": "abc123",
      "error": null
    }
  ],
  "warnings": []
}
```

### Result Object
Fields:
- `id` (string, required): commit id from the plan.
- `status` (string, required): `planned`, `applied`, `skipped`, `failed`.
- `commit_hash` (string, optional): git hash when applied.
- `error` (object or null, optional): error details if failed.

## Error Response
Used for any failure; never mixed with a success payload.

```json
{
  "schema_version": "v1",
  "request_id": "req_789",
  "error": {
    "code": "input_invalid",
    "message": "stdin is empty",
    "details": {
      "hint": "pipe a git diff, use --diff-file, or pass --repo"
    }
  }
}
```

### Error Object
Fields:
- `code` (string, required): machine-readable error code.
- `message` (string, required): human-readable summary.
- `details` (object, optional): additional context.

### Error Codes (initial)
- `usage_error`
- `input_invalid`
- `config_error`
- `llm_runtime_error`
- `llm_parse_error`
- `git_error`
- `timeout`

## JSON Schemas (Draft 2020-12)

### Commit Plan Response Schema
```json
{
  "$schema": "https://json-schema.org/draft/2020-12/schema",
  "$id": "https://atomc.dev/schema/v1/commit-plan.json",
  "type": "object",
  "required": ["schema_version", "plan"],
  "properties": {
    "schema_version": {"const": "v1"},
    "request_id": {"type": "string"},
    "warnings": {
      "type": "array",
      "items": {"$ref": "#/$defs/warning"}
    },
    "input": {"$ref": "#/$defs/input"},
    "plan": {
      "type": "array",
      "minItems": 1,
      "items": {"$ref": "#/$defs/commitUnit"}
    }
  },
  "additionalProperties": true,
  "$defs": {
    "warning": {
      "type": "object",
      "required": ["code", "message"],
      "properties": {
        "code": {"type": "string"},
        "message": {"type": "string"},
        "details": {"type": "object"}
      },
      "additionalProperties": true
    },
    "input": {
      "type": "object",
      "required": ["source"],
      "properties": {
        "source": {"enum": ["repo", "diff"]},
        "diff_mode": {"enum": ["worktree", "staged", "all"]},
        "include_untracked": {"type": "boolean"},
        "diff_hash": {"type": "string"}
      },
      "additionalProperties": true
    },
    "commitUnit": {
      "type": "object",
      "required": ["id", "type", "scope", "summary", "body", "files", "hunks"],
      "properties": {
        "id": {"type": "string"},
        "type": {
          "enum": [
            "feat",
            "fix",
            "refactor",
            "style",
            "docs",
            "test",
            "chore",
            "build",
            "perf",
            "ci"
          ]
        },
        "scope": {
          "oneOf": [
            {
              "type": "string",
              "pattern": "^[a-z0-9]+(-[a-z0-9]+)*$"
            },
            {"type": "null"}
          ]
        },
        "summary": {"type": "string", "minLength": 50, "maxLength": 72},
        "body": {
          "type": "array",
          "minItems": 1,
          "maxItems": 3,
          "items": {"type": "string"}
        },
        "files": {
          "type": "array",
          "minItems": 1,
          "items": {"type": "string"}
        },
        "hunks": {
          "type": "array",
          "maxItems": 0,
          "items": {"$ref": "#/$defs/hunk"}
        }
      },
      "additionalProperties": true
    },
    "hunk": {
      "type": "object",
      "required": ["file", "header"],
      "properties": {
        "file": {"type": "string"},
        "header": {"type": "string"},
        "id": {"type": "string"}
      },
      "additionalProperties": true
    }
  }
}
```

### Commit Apply Response Schema
```json
{
  "$schema": "https://json-schema.org/draft/2020-12/schema",
  "$id": "https://atomc.dev/schema/v1/commit-apply.json",
  "type": "object",
  "required": ["schema_version", "plan", "results"],
  "properties": {
    "schema_version": {"const": "v1"},
    "request_id": {"type": "string"},
    "warnings": {
      "type": "array",
      "items": {"$ref": "#/$defs/warning"}
    },
    "input": {"$ref": "#/$defs/input"},
    "plan": {
      "type": "array",
      "minItems": 1,
      "items": {"$ref": "#/$defs/commitUnit"}
    },
    "results": {
      "type": "array",
      "minItems": 1,
      "items": {"$ref": "#/$defs/result"}
    }
  },
  "additionalProperties": true,
  "$defs": {
    "warning": {
      "type": "object",
      "required": ["code", "message"],
      "properties": {
        "code": {"type": "string"},
        "message": {"type": "string"},
        "details": {"type": "object"}
      },
      "additionalProperties": true
    },
    "input": {
      "type": "object",
      "required": ["source"],
      "properties": {
        "source": {"enum": ["repo", "diff"]},
        "diff_mode": {"enum": ["worktree", "staged", "all"]},
        "include_untracked": {"type": "boolean"},
        "diff_hash": {"type": "string"}
      },
      "additionalProperties": true
    },
    "commitUnit": {
      "type": "object",
      "required": ["id", "type", "scope", "summary", "body", "files", "hunks"],
      "properties": {
        "id": {"type": "string"},
        "type": {
          "enum": [
            "feat",
            "fix",
            "refactor",
            "style",
            "docs",
            "test",
            "chore",
            "build",
            "perf",
            "ci"
          ]
        },
        "scope": {
          "oneOf": [
            {
              "type": "string",
              "pattern": "^[a-z0-9]+(-[a-z0-9]+)*$"
            },
            {"type": "null"}
          ]
        },
        "summary": {"type": "string", "minLength": 50, "maxLength": 72},
        "body": {
          "type": "array",
          "minItems": 1,
          "maxItems": 3,
          "items": {"type": "string"}
        },
        "files": {
          "type": "array",
          "minItems": 1,
          "items": {"type": "string"}
        },
        "hunks": {
          "type": "array",
          "maxItems": 0,
          "items": {"$ref": "#/$defs/hunk"}
        }
      },
      "additionalProperties": true
    },
    "hunk": {
      "type": "object",
      "required": ["file", "header"],
      "properties": {
        "file": {"type": "string"},
        "header": {"type": "string"},
        "id": {"type": "string"}
      },
      "additionalProperties": true
    },
    "result": {
      "type": "object",
      "required": ["id", "status"],
      "properties": {
        "id": {"type": "string"},
        "status": {"enum": ["planned", "applied", "skipped", "failed"]},
        "commit_hash": {"type": "string"},
        "error": {
          "oneOf": [
            {"type": "null"},
            {"$ref": "#/$defs/errorDetail"}
          ]
        }
      },
      "additionalProperties": true
    },
    "errorDetail": {
      "type": "object",
      "required": ["code", "message"],
      "properties": {
        "code": {"type": "string"},
        "message": {"type": "string"},
        "details": {"type": "object"}
      },
      "additionalProperties": true
    }
  }
}
```

### Error Response Schema
```json
{
  "$schema": "https://json-schema.org/draft/2020-12/schema",
  "$id": "https://atomc.dev/schema/v1/error.json",
  "type": "object",
  "required": ["schema_version", "error"],
  "properties": {
    "schema_version": {"const": "v1"},
    "request_id": {"type": "string"},
    "error": {"$ref": "#/$defs/error"}
  },
  "additionalProperties": true,
  "$defs": {
    "error": {
      "type": "object",
      "required": ["code", "message"],
      "properties": {
        "code": {
          "enum": [
            "usage_error",
            "input_invalid",
            "config_error",
            "llm_runtime_error",
            "llm_parse_error",
            "git_error",
            "timeout"
          ]
        },
        "message": {"type": "string"},
        "details": {"type": "object"}
      },
      "additionalProperties": true
    }
  }
}
```

## Notes
- Scope is required unless the change is truly global; set `scope` to
  null for global changes.
- Clients should treat unknown fields as optional for forward
  compatibility.

Commit message:

docs[legacy]: mark prior specs as outdated
Add banner pointing to docs/09_mvp_human_first.md

Assisted by: GPT-5.2-CODEX High

docs/03_schema.md, after:

# Schema Specification

> Note: This document is outdated. The current MVP spec starts at `docs/09_mvp_human_first.md`.

This document defines the JSON contracts returned by `atomc` and the
HTTP server. It is the canonical reference for agent integrations.

## Versioning
- Every JSON response includes `schema_version`.
- Initial value: `v1`.
- Clients must ignore unknown fields for forward compatibility.

## Common Response Fields
All responses include `schema_version`. `request_id` and `warnings` may
be present when available.

```json
{
  "schema_version": "v1",
  "request_id": "req_123",
  "warnings": []
}
```

Fields:
- `schema_version` (string, required)
- `request_id` (string, optional): trace id for logs.
- `warnings` (array, optional): non-fatal issues.

### Warning Object
```json
{
  "code": "scope_missing",
  "message": "Commit scope omitted for a global change",
  "details": {
    "commit_id": "commit-2"
  }
}
```

Fields:
- `code` (string, required)
- `message` (string, required)
- `details` (object, optional)

## Request ID
- CLI: generated per command invocation for JSON output.
- Server: generated per HTTP request; if `X-Request-Id` is provided,
  it is echoed back in responses.
- Format: opaque string; UUID or ULID recommended. A `req_` prefix is
  allowed but not required.

## Input Metadata
Plan/apply responses may include an `input` object describing how the
plan diff was derived.

Fields:
- `source` (string, required): `repo` or `diff`.
- `diff_mode` (string, optional): `worktree`, `staged`, or `all`.
- `include_untracked` (bool, optional): only for repo-derived diffs.
- `diff_hash` (string, optional): SHA-256 of the diff text formatted as
  `sha256:<hex>`.

## Commit Plan Response
Returned by `atomc plan` and `/v1/commit-plan`.

```json
{
  "schema_version": "v1",
  "request_id": "req_123",
  "input": {
    "source": "repo",
    "diff_mode": "all",
    "include_untracked": true,
    "diff_hash": "sha256:..."
  },
  "plan": [
    {
      "id": "commit-1",
      "type": "feat",
      "scope": "auth",
      "summary": "add token refresh handler",
      "body": [
        "Add refresh flow in auth service",
        "Wire refresh to login middleware"
      ],
      "files": ["src/auth.rs", "src/middleware.rs"],
      "hunks": []
    }
  ],
  "warnings": []
}
```

### Commit Unit
Fields:
- `id` (string, required): unique within the plan.
- `type` (string, required): conventional commit type.
- `scope` (string or null, required): kebab-case (lowercase letters, digits,
  hyphens only) or null for global.
- `summary` (string, required): 50-72 chars, imperative.
- `body` (array of strings, required): 1-3 bullet lines.
- `files` (array of strings, required): repo-relative paths.
- `hunks` (array, required): must be empty in MVP.

### Commit Types
Allowed values for `type`:
`feat`, `fix`, `refactor`, `style`, `docs`, `test`, `chore`, `build`,
`perf`, `ci`.

### Hunk Target (optional)
Hunks allow more precise staging. In MVP this may be empty.

```json
{
  "file": "src/auth.rs",
  "header": "@@ -10,6 +10,12 @@",
  "id": "hunk-1"
}
```

Fields:
- `file` (string, required): repo-relative path.
- `header` (string, required): git hunk header line.
- `id` (string, optional): stable identifier for the hunk.

## Commit Apply Response
Returned by `atomc apply` and `/v1/commit-apply`.

```json
{
  "schema_version": "v1",
  "request_id": "req_456",
  "input": {
    "source": "repo",
    "diff_mode": "all",
    "include_untracked": true,
    "diff_hash": "sha256:..."
  },
  "plan": [ /* same as Commit Plan */ ],
  "results": [
    {
      "id": "commit-1",
      "status": "applied",
      "commit_hash": "abc123",
      "error": null
    }
  ],
  "warnings": []
}
```

### Result Object
Fields:
- `id` (string, required): commit id from the plan.
- `status` (string, required): `planned`, `applied`, `skipped`, `failed`.
- `commit_hash` (string, optional): git hash when applied.
- `error` (object or null, optional): error details if failed.

## Error Response
Used for any failure; never mixed with a success payload.

```json
{
  "schema_version": "v1",
  "request_id": "req_789",
  "error": {
    "code": "input_invalid",
    "message": "stdin is empty",
    "details": {
      "hint": "pipe a git diff, use --diff-file, or pass --repo"
    }
  }
}
```

### Error Object
Fields:
- `code` (string, required): machine-readable error code.
- `message` (string, required): human-readable summary.
- `details` (object, optional): additional context.

### Error Codes (initial)
- `usage_error`
- `input_invalid`
- `config_error`
- `llm_runtime_error`
- `llm_parse_error`
- `git_error`
- `timeout`

## JSON Schemas (Draft 2020-12)

### Commit Plan Response Schema
```json
{
  "$schema": "https://json-schema.org/draft/2020-12/schema",
  "$id": "https://atomc.dev/schema/v1/commit-plan.json",
  "type": "object",
  "required": ["schema_version", "plan"],
  "properties": {
    "schema_version": {"const": "v1"},
    "request_id": {"type": "string"},
    "warnings": {
      "type": "array",
      "items": {"$ref": "#/$defs/warning"}
    },
    "input": {"$ref": "#/$defs/input"},
    "plan": {
      "type": "array",
      "minItems": 1,
      "items": {"$ref": "#/$defs/commitUnit"}
    }
  },
  "additionalProperties": true,
  "$defs": {
    "warning": {
      "type": "object",
      "required": ["code", "message"],
      "properties": {
        "code": {"type": "string"},
        "message": {"type": "string"},
        "details": {"type": "object"}
      },
      "additionalProperties": true
    },
    "input": {
      "type": "object",
      "required": ["source"],
      "properties": {
        "source": {"enum": ["repo", "diff"]},
        "diff_mode": {"enum": ["worktree", "staged", "all"]},
        "include_untracked": {"type": "boolean"},
        "diff_hash": {"type": "string"}
      },
      "additionalProperties": true
    },
    "commitUnit": {
      "type": "object",
      "required": ["id", "type", "scope", "summary", "body", "files", "hunks"],
      "properties": {
        "id": {"type": "string"},
        "type": {
          "enum": [
            "feat",
            "fix",
            "refactor",
            "style",
            "docs",
            "test",
            "chore",
            "build",
            "perf",
            "ci"
          ]
        },
        "scope": {
          "oneOf": [
            {
              "type": "string",
              "pattern": "^[a-z0-9]+(-[a-z0-9]+)*$"
            },
            {"type": "null"}
          ]
        },
        "summary": {"type": "string", "minLength": 50, "maxLength": 72},
        "body": {
          "type": "array",
          "minItems": 1,
          "maxItems": 3,
          "items": {"type": "string"}
        },
        "files": {
          "type": "array",
          "minItems": 1,
          "items": {"type": "string"}
        },
        "hunks": {
          "type": "array",
          "maxItems": 0,
          "items": {"$ref": "#/$defs/hunk"}
        }
      },
      "additionalProperties": true
    },
    "hunk": {
      "type": "object",
      "required": ["file", "header"],
      "properties": {
        "file": {"type": "string"},
        "header": {"type": "string"},
        "id": {"type": "string"}
      },
      "additionalProperties": true
    }
  }
}
```

### Commit Apply Response Schema
```json
{
  "$schema": "https://json-schema.org/draft/2020-12/schema",
  "$id": "https://atomc.dev/schema/v1/commit-apply.json",
  "type": "object",
  "required": ["schema_version", "plan", "results"],
  "properties": {
    "schema_version": {"const": "v1"},
    "request_id": {"type": "string"},
    "warnings": {
      "type": "array",
      "items": {"$ref": "#/$defs/warning"}
    },
    "input": {"$ref": "#/$defs/input"},
    "plan": {
      "type": "array",
      "minItems": 1,
      "items": {"$ref": "#/$defs/commitUnit"}
    },
    "results": {
      "type": "array",
      "minItems": 1,
      "items": {"$ref": "#/$defs/result"}
    }
  },
  "additionalProperties": true,
  "$defs": {
    "warning": {
      "type": "object",
      "required": ["code", "message"],
      "properties": {
        "code": {"type": "string"},
        "message": {"type": "string"},
        "details": {"type": "object"}
      },
      "additionalProperties": true
    },
    "input": {
      "type": "object",
      "required": ["source"],
      "properties": {
        "source": {"enum": ["repo", "diff"]},
        "diff_mode": {"enum": ["worktree", "staged", "all"]},
        "include_untracked": {"type": "boolean"},
        "diff_hash": {"type": "string"}
      },
      "additionalProperties": true
    },
    "commitUnit": {
      "type": "object",
      "required": ["id", "type", "scope", "summary", "body", "files", "hunks"],
      "properties": {
        "id": {"type": "string"},
        "type": {
          "enum": [
            "feat",
            "fix",
            "refactor",
            "style",
            "docs",
            "test",
            "chore",
            "build",
            "perf",
            "ci"
          ]
        },
        "scope": {
          "oneOf": [
            {
              "type": "string",
              "pattern": "^[a-z0-9]+(-[a-z0-9]+)*$"
            },
            {"type": "null"}
          ]
        },
        "summary": {"type": "string", "minLength": 50, "maxLength": 72},
        "body": {
          "type": "array",
          "minItems": 1,
          "maxItems": 3,
          "items": {"type": "string"}
        },
        "files": {
          "type": "array",
          "minItems": 1,
          "items": {"type": "string"}
        },
        "hunks": {
          "type": "array",
          "maxItems": 0,
          "items": {"$ref": "#/$defs/hunk"}
        }
      },
      "additionalProperties": true
    },
    "hunk": {
      "type": "object",
      "required": ["file", "header"],
      "properties": {
        "file": {"type": "string"},
        "header": {"type": "string"},
        "id": {"type": "string"}
      },
      "additionalProperties": true
    },
    "result": {
      "type": "object",
      "required": ["id", "status"],
      "properties": {
        "id": {"type": "string"},
        "status": {"enum": ["planned", "applied", "skipped", "failed"]},
        "commit_hash": {"type": "string"},
        "error": {
          "oneOf": [
            {"type": "null"},
            {"$ref": "#/$defs/errorDetail"}
          ]
        }
      },
      "additionalProperties": true
    },
    "errorDetail": {
      "type": "object",
      "required": ["code", "message"],
      "properties": {
        "code": {"type": "string"},
        "message": {"type": "string"},
        "details": {"type": "object"}
      },
      "additionalProperties": true
    }
  }
}
```

### Error Response Schema
```json
{
  "$schema": "https://json-schema.org/draft/2020-12/schema",
  "$id": "https://atomc.dev/schema/v1/error.json",
  "type": "object",
  "required": ["schema_version", "error"],
  "properties": {
    "schema_version": {"const": "v1"},
    "request_id": {"type": "string"},
    "error": {"$ref": "#/$defs/error"}
  },
  "additionalProperties": true,
  "$defs": {
    "error": {
      "type": "object",
      "required": ["code", "message"],
      "properties": {
        "code": {
          "enum": [
            "usage_error",
            "input_invalid",
            "config_error",
            "llm_runtime_error",
            "llm_parse_error",
            "git_error",
            "timeout"
          ]
        },
        "message": {"type": "string"},
        "details": {"type": "object"}
      },
      "additionalProperties": true
    }
  }
}
```

## Notes
- Scope is required unless the change is truly global; set `scope` to
  null for global changes.
- Clients should treat unknown fields as optional for forward
  compatibility.
